PET CRTC 6545 Test Programs
(C) 1999-2006 Andr√© Fachat

taken from http://www.6502.org/users/andre/hwinfo/crtc/pet/index.html
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The programs in this directory are a number of test programs for the CRTC in the 
Commodore PET computers. Well, "test program" is probably a bit to much. In fact 
they demonstrate some timing issues and how the internal registers can be used 
to produce some effects.

The programs have been tested with my european CBM 8296D. The ROMs set the CRTC 
to 59 cycles/rasterline and 339 rasterlines, which makes 20001 cycles/frame, or 
50Hz frame rate. The vertical sync position changes, though, between upper/lower 
case mode and graphics mode.

================================================================================
The PET screens are sensitive to the timing. If they get the wrong one, it might 
break the screen!!! Currently there is no test done for the ROM version, the 
program does not check whether what it does is ok!

DO NOT RUN those programs! They are provided for educational purposes only! 
There is NO WARRANTY attached to those programs. You are warned.
================================================================================

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vertical Retrace
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

crtc1.a65
crtc2.a65

Those two programs demonstrate the timing of the vertical retrace for upper/
lowercase and graphics modes respectively.

The PET standard mode sets PIA1, CA1 to trigger the IRQ at the high-low 
transistion of the vertical drive signal. This is the inverted CRTC VSync signal. 
This signal thus generates the system interrupt. As there is no other way to 
synchronize the CPU with the CRTC, this interrupt is used. The standard mode 
then triggers the IRQ at the leading edge of the vertical sync signal of the 
CRTC.

The programs invert the top character line of the screen around the time when 
the CRTC reads this line for display. When the screen changes from inverted to 
not-inverted at least on my screen there is a very small vertical line in the 
scanline. This way it can be seen when the CRTC reads the inverted char and when 
not.

The timings, that are explained in the source files, show that the IRQ cycle is 
stable across the time and can reliably be computed - in relation to the first 
screen cycle - as:

IRQcycle = cycles/rasterline * rasterlines/char * vsync_position
where 
	cycles/rasterline = CRTCreg[0] + 1
	rasterlines/char = CRTCreg[9] + 1
	vsync_position = CRTCreg[7] 
Substract that from the total number of
cycles/frame = cycles/rasterline * 
		(characterlines * rasterlines/char + vertical_adjust)
where
	characterlines = CRTCreg[4]
	vertical_adjust = CRTCreg[5]
and you get the number of cycles the raster interrupt is triggered _before_ the 
first screen cycle.
Files
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Uncompensated HSync
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

crtc3.a65

This program moves the next-to-last line two character to the right. It does 
this by setting the VIA interrupt to somewhere in the last rasterline of the 
22nd character line. Then the position of the HSync is changed. The program then 
busy-loops to the last rasterline of the 23rd charline and resets the hsync 
value.

Unfortunately the CRT electronics does not cope very well with the changed Hsync 
position. The position overshoots in the first changed rasterline, goes back to 
far in the second, and forwards again. This happens at both changes. The 
characters are disturbed in the 23rd and the 22nd character line. This means 
that this effect is probably not very useful.

A screen shot shows the cursor in the 22nd line as well as the diagonal line of 
digits with the distortion.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Compensated HSync
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

crtc4.a65
crtc5.a65

Those two programs implement the side-shift by adjusting the line length of the 
line before the shift, such that the hsync timing does not change for the CRT:

The line before the shift is lengthened by one cycle. The first shifted line is 
set to standard length again, but hsync is now set one cycle earlier. The last 
shifted line is then shortened by one cycle to adjust for the total number of 
cycles, and the first again unshifted line is set to standard hsync position and 
length again.

This way the hsync timing shows no phase shift to the CRT electronics, thus no 
real disturbance.

crtc4 (see below) moves the line to the right, crtc5 to the left. Also crtc5 
uses VIA T2 instead of VIA T1, but this did not help with the use of IEEE488 
during the demo (crashes :-(

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chars per line
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

crtc6.a65
crtc7.a65
crtc8.a65
crtc9.a65

Those test programs demonstrate the rasterline timing with respect to the number 
of visible chars/line. One first remark: The memory pointer where to read the 
character data from is increased by the number of visible characters in each 
line. Thus changing the length of the charline changes the position of the first 
char of a line in memory.

crtc6 and crtc7 set the number of visible chars to 20 (by setting register 1 to 
10), but _after_ the 20th char has been displayed. This means that in this 
rasterline the current column never becomes the value of register 1. Thus after 
the 80th column the display continues, even during the horizontal retrace. The 
data is taken from the next charline, as the memory pointer is still increased. 
crtc6 does so at the last rasterline of the 23rd charline. This has another 
consequence, as the memory pointer for the start of the next charline is not 
updated! The charline is repeated, but this time only 20 chars long.

Therefore in this picture the cursor is two characters high.

crtc7 does so at the first rasterline of the 24th charline. So only the first 
rasterline of the 24th charline is displayed over the horizontal retrace.

crtc8 limits the number of columns to 60, by writing 30 to register 1. This time 
the register is updated before the position is reached by the raster beam. 
However, this time it is done one rasterline early. Thus the 24th charline 
repeats the last 20 char of the 23rd charline, where the last rasterline is 
missing for the last 20 chars. The last rasterline of the 24th charline is then 
80 cols long. Of those chars only the last rasterline is seen, as the next line 
continues where the last rasterline of the previous line ends. crtc9 then does 
the correct timing.
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Character Height
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

crtc10.a65
crtc11.a65
crtc12.a65

Those three programs try to change the character height in the next to last 
character line. The first attempt sets the character height at the first 
rasterline of the 24th charline to the height 4. After 8 rasterlines the height 
is set back to 8, then it adjusts the vertical rasterline adjust to get back to 
the right timing. But due to this adjustment the position of the vertical sync 
changes. Thus the position of the IRQ in the frame changes and in the next frame 
the height changes to 4 between the 4th and the 8th rasterline. It is set back 
to 8 after the 8th rasterline. This means that the compare between the current 
rasterline and the register is never reached - the charline is then expanded to 
32 rasterline, the maximum value. Because the compare is not reached, the next 
charline displays the enlarged rasterline again!

In the "normal" PET, i.e. 8032 all rasterlines above the 8th are set to blank by 
the hardware. In the 8296 board the RA4 line is used as an additional RAM 
address line. Only RA3 is used to blank the rasterline, thus rasterlines 0-7 
show the normal characters, 8-15 are blank, 16-23 show the contents of some 
other part of the RAM, and rasterlines 24-31 of a char are blank again.

In this picture of crtc10 the RA4 line used as in the 8296 (only the memory 
adress during the single character line (with the middle "2") is wrong - a bug 
in VICE...). On a normal 8032 this single line would be blank too. What seems to 
be a short vertical blanked line is the cursor, that is displayed in three lines 
here.

crtc11 gets the interrupt one rasterline earlier, and with the 4 rasterline 
adjust the height change takes place before the 4th rasterline is reached. I.e. 
the compare is reached and the next charline then has a height of 4.

crtc12 gets the interrupt again at the first rasterline of the charline. It 
changes only one charline to 4 rasterline by waiting 4 rasterlines to set the 
height to 8 again. It does not adjust the vertical timing, though, so the total 
frame timing is different (4 rasterlines short). However, the interrupt timing 
is not changed, so this works.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Vertical boarders
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

crtc13.a65

This test one opens the vertical borders by writing a value into the vertical 
displayed rows register that is lower than the row counter. After the counter 
has passed the original value, this original value is set to the register again.

What is not seen here is the display during the vertical retrace. This retrace 
display can disturb the normal screen because it is overlayed over the original 
picture (this is not emulated in the VICE emulator that is used to capture these 
pictures at this time).

This effect can actually much easier be done by a POKE 59520, 6: POKE 59521, 64 
:-) (If you use VICE, do a PRINT CHR$(142) before the pokes).
 
